Let’s talk about conflict.
This is an element of drama
that’s usually taken for granted.
Although
we’re aware of it
even if we don’t identify it.
We can tell if the conflict
development is good
when it draws the audience
to watch the play.
Why?
If the character’s
objective is clear,
then the obstacle
should be clear as well.
Character equals objective.
Conflict equals obstacle.
So, objective and obstacle
and the interplay between the two.
Whatever the character does
to achieve the objective,
she has to go through
a lot of challenges.
That’s the obstacle.
The story becomes
nerve-wracking or very interesting
and very suspenseful
because of those two things.
When you remove the obstacle,
it’ll be easy for the character
to achieve her objective.
And she won’t learn much from it
if she easily attains it.
But when you put too many hurdles,
the character might die or give up
because she’s unable to cope.
Those two are completely
valid conclusions for your story.
But that depends on
what you want to say
and the effect
you want to have.
If we'll pity the character
or understand all she's gone through,
that despite overcoming those hardships,
she still died.
We could either pity
or understand the character.
Or in the case of comedy,
we could laugh at the situation
or celebrate with the character.
It's easy to talk about it
but difficult to do
because you have to look
for the right situation.
You need to look
for an appropriate situation
and context where the audience
doesn't have to wonder,
"Why'd that happen?"
It's just like watching boxing, right?
When you're knocked out, it's over.
There’s nothing else to it.
It’s over.
But probably because
you don’t provide an obstacle
that your character may
or may not be able to hurdle.
If the obstacle's so big that...
she can't handle it,
then she won't be
able to show her character,
her mettle to persevere.
It has to be at a certain point
where the audience
is also uncertain
if she can make it or not.
It must be formidable enough—
because if the conflict's too small,
the story ends immediately
because it’s easily resolved.
It has to be formidable enough
for her to sacrifice
an important part
of her life or of her character.
So that if she ever achieves
what she wants,
there's a scar.
She also lost something.
She needs to give something away,
to let go of something.
Those are the things
that'll make it interesting.
Again, the logic is realistic in mode.
What I want to tackle
is how to look at conflict
in different ways.
Back in high school,
we'd always say
that there are different
kinds of conflict:
man against man,
two people fighting,
man against himself,
man against nature.
For a reader,
this may be easy to understand.
But for a writer who wants
to make plays for the stage,
the next question would be,
"So what now?"
"How will this help my writing?"
I have different ways
of looking at conflict.
It might help you
in approaching how to
set up these obstacles.
The first approach
is the simplest one.
Conflict arises when one character
and another want the same thing.
Whether it's love, gold,
oil mine, presidency,
or boxing championship,
these two characters
want the same thing.
And because they only want one thing,
only one person can have it.
Definitely,
they're going to fight
until someone gets that one thing.
That’s the simplest
or most basic.
Another approach is the conflict
that arises within oneself.
How does that happen?
This isn't just conflict with yourself
where you're talking to yourself, no.
But depending on the situation,
it's usually a conflict between
two identities of the same person.
One identity could be a teacher
and the other could be
a gay lover.
And these identities
could reach a point
where one has to be sacrificed.
Especially if, for example,
there’s a scandal.
Her reputation as a teacher
could go down.
So, these two identities of the character
have to be weighed.
She has to weigh
which one she’ll let go.
It's painful for the character.
But that's clearer compared to saying
man is against himself, right?
We’re usually forced to choose
depending on where we are.
Will I resign from this job
because I want to be an artist?
Despite always talking about
how will we earn?
So the clash between those
two identities will force you to choose just one.
For example, again,
the only example
I could think of now,
I don't know why it's always Macbeth,
but it's about his loyalty to the king.
He’s loyal to the king,
and the possibility
of him becoming king.
Those are the two roles in his life.
It has come to a point
where one must give way to the other.
'Cause his loyalty to the king
is not a desire, it’s a duty.
Then comes this stimulation
where he could be king.
If you look at it from that set-up,
from that context,
is he doing what he's preaching?
He's subjected to a test.
These kinds of conflict,
usually have something to do
with being authentic, with being whole.
The character
being whole, being unified.
This is where she's forced to lie,
to herself and to others.
That's what you have to put
your character through,
where her stability collapses
because she wants something.
But what she wants
might exact a price
that she'll have to...
give way for her other role.
Just like character,
conflicts have a heavy
implication if you look for it.
And eventually, ultimately,
it's built on what you want to say.
Is this just about infidelity?
Or is that conflict
also a metaphor
for a deeper problem?
Let's not go anymore to
the topic of being gay
because sometimes
coming out is like peeling onion layers.
I may come out to you
but I may not be out
in another context.
For one reason or another,
when you write it and those two clash,
the character
will be forced to choose.
That's usually
the interesting kind of conlict
because it's not just
full of action or catfights
just because they want the same thing.
“No, I want this.”
“No, I want that.”
That's one level.
Another level
is when you're forced to...
to weigh things and you may
have to give up or lose something.
Another way of looking at conflict
would be...
to look at...
the status
of each character.
This is a bit hard to explain,
but I'll try.
Humans...
are like dogs.
We're very conscious
of hierarchy,
of status.
Even when we don't say it,
we can feel it and gauge it.
Even when we walk on the streets
and there's a narrow road,
the person who'll give way
is in effect lowering his status
to let the other person pass.
That's how we are,
always negotiating our status.
If I'm a teacher,
I'd have a higher status
than the students.
They'd call me sir
or say 'po'.
Not just because of my age,
but because of my position as a teacher.
But in other situations,
I'd be the one saying 'po'.
I'd be the one saying sir.
Even to security guards.
Or to the manager of a company
I’m coaxing to accept me.
Or to a producer.
You will hear how I humble myself
from the tone of my voice.
And you will also hear
how domineering she sounds
from the tone of her voice.
So with each line, each dialogue
the character utters,
she's establishing something.
Whether she knows it or not,
she's establishing her status.
This status negotiation shows
where the story's headed
in order for the character
to get what she wants.
There are many strategies
regarding status.
In any scene that you write...
If you look back
on the scenes you’ve written,
almost unconsciously,
they are negotiations for status.
And it doesn't mean
it's just as simple as
putting yourself on a higher
status to achieve what you want.
Sometimes,
the character’s strategy
is to put herself on a lower status
to get what she wants.
Characters who are asslickers.
Usually when her superior laughs,
she laughs as well.
Once you master
the understanding of
this psychological phenomenon of humans,
you can play with it.
There are strategies
to get what they want.
And sometimes,
people are blind to it
that it determines
their downfall.
She got blindsided.
Something like that.
That's the stuff of tragedy, right?
She has a tragic flaw.
She didn't see.
That puts her down
and elevates the other.
Ultimately,
the most impactful way
to show the conflict of status changes
is through a reversal in the entire play.
When Cinderella who was oppressed
in the beginning
becomes a princess in the end,
there's a reversal of status.
But it's not just about fortune.
That's also what happened
to Macbeth,
wherein he
used to serve the king,
but rose to prominence
when he killed the king.
And in the end,
he also fell down hard.
So any form of reversal in status
will create the same impact.
And you can only do that
when you look at conflict
as a negotiation of status.
If you think nothing's happening,
and the banters just go on,
it's probably because
there's no
status development happening.
It's either there's a reversal
or it's just static like this.
Sometimes a piece of evidence
will suddenly
reverse the status of characters.
And it’s got something
to do with conflict
because all these
status negotiations of characters
refer to whether the character
will be able to get
what he or she wants or not
and at what price.
With every character
in a three-character play,
let's say one’s a supporting character
to attain the objective
of the first character,
would it still be interesting
to have status negotiation
in their relationship?
Even when she's supporting
the other character?
- Yes.
Yes.
I'm sure the third character
also wants something.
The supporting character
must also want something.
What's great about that is
if you shake the situation,
you'll see that they
might not always be in sync
with each other.
So there'll be trust issues,
for example,
which may be different
from the other one.
They could be allies
when the third character is there.
But when the third isn't there,
they could be in conflict with each other.
That could be interesting.
The reversal of that could be
the other character siding with the third.
There are a lot
of configurations you can do.
Even if you just think about
the character's status trajectory
to get what she wants.
It's also good to identify
what conflict is occurring?
Of course, before that,
you have to ask,
"What does this character want?"
"Why can't she get it?"
When the obstacle isn't clear,
then maybe that's what's dragging
the conflict or the play.
Because the conflict isn't clear.
The hurdle you put
before the character
to achieve what she
wants isn't clear enough.
That tight relationship
between objective and obstacle
is what will develop
and intensify the situation
which, in turn, will
keep the audience glued
to what will happen next.
So that's it.
That's conflict.